Parameterized verification with Byzantine Model Checker

Threshold guards are a basic primitive of many fault-tolerant algorithms that
solve the following classical problems of distributed computing: reliable
broadcast, two-phase commit, and consensus. Moreover, threshold guards can be
found in recent Blockchain algorithms such as Tendermint consensus.

Byzantine Model Checker (ByMC) implements several techniques for automatic
verification of threshold-guarded distributed algorithms. These algorithms have
the following features: (1) up to t of processes may crash or behave Byzantine;
(2) the correct processes count messages and progress when they receive
sufficiently many messages, e.g., at least t+1; (3) the number n of processes
in the system is a parameter, as well as t; (4) and the parameters are
restricted by a resilience condition, e.g., n > 3t.  Nowadays these algorithms
are implemented in the distributed systems that involve from hundreds to
thousands of computers. To make sure that these algorithms are still correct
for that scale it is imperative to verify them for all combinations of the
parameters.

In this tutorial, we give an overview of the techniques implemented in ByMC.
We demonstrate how to use ByMC for parameterized verification of asynchronous
fault-tolerant distributed algorithms. We show how to apply our techniques in
other contexts, for instance, for verification of randomized algorithms and
verification of synchronous algorithms.

Bio: Igor Konnov is a senior research scientist at Informal Systems (Austria),
spin-off of Interchain Foundation (Switzerland). He is developing model
checking techniques for parameterized and fault-tolerant distributed
algorithms. Before joining Informal Systems and Interchain Foundation, Igor
Konnov worked as a researcher at Inria Nancy (France) and as a postdoc at TU
Wien (Austria). He received his MSc and PhD in Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science from Lomonosov Moscow State University (Russia) in 2003 and 2009. In
2019, Igor received his Habilitation from TU Wien (Austria). 
