Invited Speakers
----------------

(FORTE)
Ken McMillan, Microsoft Research, Redmond. (Constraints?)  kenmcmil@microsoft.com

(DAIS) 
Holger Hermanns, Saarland University, (Wednesday/Thursday) hermanns@cs.uni-saarland.de


Title:
Power-Optimal Scheduling of LEO Satellite Networks

Abstract:
Size and weight limitations of Low-Earth Orbit (LEO) small satellites make their operation rest on a fine balance between solar power infeed and power demands of payload and communication technologies on board, buffered by on-board battery storage. As a result, the problem of managing battery-powered payload utilization together with inter-satellite communication is extremely intricate. Nevertheless, there is a growing trend towards constellations and mega-constellations that are to be managed using sophisticated software support.

This invited talk provides a survey of our recent and ongoing work harvesting formal methods research and tool support to master the problem of optimal, effective, scalable, usable, and robust managment of LEO satellite networks. We will discuss how timed-automata modelling, dynamic programming, stochastic-kinetic battery representations, receding-horizon scheduling and well-designed abstract programming interfaces play together in the optimal automated managment of the GomX-4 satellite family currently in orbit. The approach has been validated in an extensive campaign focussing on applicability, scalability, optimality, and timeliness with respect to the operational requirements and constraints of LEO constellations.

joint work with Fakhri Babayev, Morten Bisgaard, Eduardo Cruz, Juan A. Fraire, Carsten Gerstacker, Gilles Nies, Gregory Stock, Tobias Mömke

Bio:
Holger Hermanns is Professor in Computer Science at Saarland University in Germany, heading the Dependable Systems and Software group, and Distinguished Professor at Institute of Intelligent Software, Guangzhou. He has previously held positions at Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany, at Universiteit Twente, the Netherlands, and at INRIA Grenoble Rhône-Alpes, France.

His research interests include modeling and verification of concurrent systems, resource-aware embedded systems, compositional performance and dependability evaluation, and their applications to energy informatics. He is an outspoken proponent of proactive algorithmic accountability and distinguished expert on ethics for nerds.

Holger Hermanns has authored or co-authored more than 220 peer-reviewed scientific papers (ha-index 92, h-index 54). He co-chaired the program committees of major international conferences such as CAV, CONCUR, TACAS and QEST, and delivered keynotes at about a dozen international conferences and symposia. He serves on the steering committees of ETAPS, LICS and TACAS, is an ERC Advanced Grantee, member of Academia Europaea, spokesperson of TRR 248 on a Science of Perspicuous Computing, and president of the association "Friends of Dagstuhl e.V.".


(COORDINATION) 
Peter Kriens, OSGi Alliance (No constraints) - CONFIRMED peter.kriens@aqute.biz
Formal Specifications to Increase Understanding
I've been active in the Alloy (MIT, Daniel Jackson) community the last few years. Alloy is an interactive formal specification tool using SAT and SMT to find counter examples. However, I am quite frustrated how the focus is on the least interesting aspects for me, 'proving' the correctness of a specification. It is for me the least interesting because it requires the spec to be correct (hard!) and it requires the implementation to follow the spec exactly. The people involved in this area seem to leave these all important aspects as a detail for the practitioners. Instead they focus on more and more esoteric things like beating the combinatorial explosion in the proving aspects. I think 'something' like Alloy could be eminently used is to define the semantics of APIs. Today, we define those semantics in comments or, worse, outside documents. Formally defining service APIs seems a low hanging fruit that would boost code writing. (As a developer you spend most of your time trying to understand the domain) and testing (the tool could generate test case data). The service API would make it modular which is an idea that seems to gain traction in the formal specification world to keep the models small enough for the SAT/SMT solvers. 


title:		Formal Specifications to Increase Understanding

	abstract:	I've been active in the Alloy (MIT, Daniel Jackson) community for the last few years. Alloy is an interactive formal specification tool using SAT and SMT to find counterexamples. However, despite my enthusiasm, I am also quite frustrated with how the focus is on the least interesting aspects for me: 'proving' the correctness of a specification. It is for me the least interesting because it requires the spec to be correct, which is very hard. However, even harder, it requires the implementation to follow the spec exactly. The people involved in this area seem to leave these all-important aspects as a detail for the practitioners. Instead, they focus on the more and more esoteric things like beating the combinatorial explosion in the proving aspects. I think 'something' like Alloy could be eminently useful if it is used to define the semantics of APIs. Today, we define those semantics in comments or, worse, some external Word document. Formally defining service APIs seems a low hanging fruit that would boost development productivity significantly. (As a developer you spend most of your time trying to understand the domain) and testing (the tool could generate test case data). Using the service API as an anchor point of such a tool would make it modular, allowing larger specifications that could still be proven. This presentation will explore how such a tool could look like.

	bio		Peter Kriens has been a software expert consulting for a large number of (some very) large companies like Ericsson, Intel, Adobe, Philips, etc. Over the past 20 years he has been one of the key people in the development of the OSGi specifications; A highly modular µ-service based component model for the Java world. Many innovations in this specification originated from him. Already since 1980 highly interested and engaged in finding ways to develop software _better_. He has mentored hundreds of people to do software engineering. Still very much driven by the idea that there should be a better way ... He is Dutch but has been living in Sweden and now already 17 years in the south of France.

	photo		https://www.aqute.biz/img/portrait.jpg



(General)
Nathalie Bertrand, INRIA Rennes Bretagne-Atlantique,  nathalie.bertrand@inria.fr   



Title/ 
Probabilistic threshold automata for modeling and verifying randomized
distributed algorithms

/Abstract/ 
Randomisation is a powerful tool to solve computationally hard problems: in
distributed computing, probabilities can even permit to solve problems that are
otherwise unsolvable, such as the consensus problem for asynchronous message-
passing systems. 
Threshold automata were introduced by Konnov et al. to automatically prove
safety and liveness properties in fault-tolerant non-probabilistic distributed
algorithms. They fall short at representing randomized behaviours and algorithms
working in rounds. We introduced a probabilistic variant of threshold automata,
and designed model-checking algorithms to automatically verify whether given
properties hold almost-surely (i.e. with probability 1). These are first steps
towards the automated verification of randomised distributed algorithms. 

/Short bio/
Nathalie Bertrand got her PhD degree from ENS Cachan in 2006. Since 2007, she is
Inria researcher at IRISA Rennes. Her expertise lies in formal methods, in
particular model checking, with a special focus on probabilistic models.









Tutorials Day
-------------

9.00-10.30 (BehAPI- yes)
Title: Choreographic development of message-passing applications

Abstract
Choreography envisages distributed coordination as determined by interations that allow peer components to harmoniously realise a given task. Unlike in orchestration-based coordination, there is no special component directing the execution. 
Recently choreographic approaches became popular in industrial contexts where reliability and scalability are crucial factors.
This tutorial will review some recent ideas to harness choreographic development of message-passing software.

Bio
Emilio Tuosto is an associate professor. He graduated (1998) and got his PhD degree in Computer Science (2003) at the department of Computer Science, University of Pisa. Before joining Leicester, he has been a research associate (2003-2005) at the Dipartimento di Informatica (University of Pisa).

Emilio's main research interests are in theoretical and applied aspects of complex distributed systems. Recently he has been working on automata- and behavioural type-based models of distributed choreographies, contract-based models of distributed interactions, and their application to the engineering of distributed and concurrent systems.



10.30-12.00 (FORTE - yes)
Parameterized verification with Byzantine Model Checker

Threshold guards are a basic primitive of many fault-tolerant algorithms that
solve the following classical problems of distributed computing: reliable
broadcast, two-phase commit, and consensus. Moreover, threshold guards can be
found in recent Blockchain algorithms such as Tendermint consensus.

Byzantine Model Checker (ByMC) implements several techniques for automatic
verification of threshold-guarded distributed algorithms. These algorithms have
the following features: (1) up to t of processes may crash or behave Byzantine;
(2) the correct processes count messages and progress when they receive
sufficiently many messages, e.g., at least t+1; (3) the number n of processes
in the system is a parameter, as well as t; (4) and the parameters are
restricted by a resilience condition, e.g., n > 3t.  Nowadays these algorithms
are implemented in the distributed systems that involve from hundreds to
thousands of computers. To make sure that these algorithms are still correct
for that scale it is imperative to verify them for all combinations of the
parameters.

In this tutorial, we give an overview of the techniques implemented in ByMC.
We demonstrate how to use ByMC for parameterized verification of asynchronous
fault-tolerant distributed algorithms. We show how to apply our techniques in
other contexts, for instance, for verification of randomized algorithms and
verification of synchronous algorithms.

Bio: Igor Konnov is a senior research scientist at Informal Systems (Austria),
spin-off of Interchain Foundation (Switzerland). He is developing model
checking techniques for parameterized and fault-tolerant distributed
algorithms. Before joining Informal Systems and Interchain Foundation, Igor
Konnov worked as a researcher at Inria Nancy (France) and as a postdoc at TU
Wien (Austria). He received his MSc and PhD in Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science from Lomonosov Moscow State University (Russia) in 2003 and 2009. In
2019, Igor received his Habilitation from TU Wien (Austria). 




13.00-14.00 (Coordination -yes)
TITLE:
CHOReVOLUTION IDRE: an Integrated Development and Run-time Environment for automatically realizing and executing distributed applications.

PRESENTERS:
Marco Autili and Massimo Tivoli.

DEVELOPMENT TEAM:
Marco Autili, Amleto Di Salle, Claudio Pompilio, Massimo Tivoli.

ABSTRACT:
Since late 70’s, the development of concurrent and distributed systems has been receiving much attention from the research community. Choreographies are a form of distributed composition that model the external interaction of the participant services by specifying peer-to-peer message exchanges from a global perspective. When third-party services are to be composed, obtaining the distributed coordination logic required to enforce the realizability of the specified choreography is a non-trivial and error prone task. Automatic support is then needed. CHOReVOLUTION is a platform for the tool-assisted development and execution of choreography-based applications that leverage the distributed collaboration of services specified through service choreographies. It offers an Integrated Development and Runtime Environment (IDRE) comprising a wizard-aided development environment, a system monitoring console, and a back-end for managing the deployment and execution of the system. The tutorial introduces the fundamentals of service choreographies and the CHOReVOLUTION approach as first. Then the introduction of the approach is followed by hands on exercises, where every attendee takes part in developing sample choreography-based distributed applications by using the CHOReVOLUTION IDRE.

14.30-16.00 (FORTE - no)
Title: The Probabilistic Model Checker Storm 
Abstract:
We present the probabilistic model checker Storm.
Storm supports the analysis of discrete- and continuous-time variants of both
Markov chains and Markov decision processes. 
Storm has three major distinguishing features.
It supports multiple input languages for Markov models, including the JANI and
PRISM modeling languages, dynamic fault trees, generalized stochastic Petri nets
and the probabilistic guarded command language.
It has a modular set-up in which solvers and symbolic engines can easily be
exchanged.
Its Python API allows for rapid prototyping by encapsulating Storm’s fast and
scalable algorithms.
Empirical evaluation of Storm within the QComp 2019 competition showed that the
tool is state-of-the-art and performed best with regards to runtime and number
of solved benchmarks.

In the tutorial we report on the main features of Storm and explain how to
effectively use them.

For more information on Storm we refer to our website
http://www.stormchecker.org/ and our recent paper https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.07080.

Short Bio:
Storm is developed at the Software Modeling and Verification group at RWTH
Aachen University since 2012. The principal developers of Storm are Christian
Hensel, Sebastian Junges, Joost-Pieter Katoen, Tim Quatmann and Matthias Volk.


14.30 -16.00 (DAIS - yes)
Title: Kollaps/Thunderstorm: reproducible evaluation of distributed systems

Abstract:
The systematic evaluation of distributed systems is a very challenging task as experimental results can be affected by a wide range of factors.
In particular, the network and its dynamics, such as sudden changes in latency or available bandwidth have a significant impact on the performance of distributed systems. 

In this tutorial we will do a hands-on demonstration of the capabilities of Kollaps/Thunderstorm, a set of tools that allow to deploy and evaluate unmodified off-the-shelf container applications under a controlled network environment.
By the end of this tutorial, attendants will be able to apply these tools in their systems and, we hope, have a better toolset to evaluate the impact of the network in their systems behavior.



Bio:

Miguel Matos is an assistant professor at the Engineering School of the University of Lisbon (Instituto Superior Técnico) and a Senior Researcher at INESC-ID.His research interests lie in the area of distributed systems, in the subjects of scalability, performance, correctness and systems evaluation. In particular, he is conducting research in blockchain and related problems,consistency and scalability in large scale databases, systems evaluation under faults and experimental reproducibility. His work has been published in venues such as TPDS, JPDC, Eurosys, IPDPS, Middleware, SRDS and DAIS.
The presented work is the result of joint work between Miguel's team at U. Lisboa, Portugal and researchers from U. of Neuchâtel, Switzerland.

16.30-18.00 (BehAPI - yes)
Title: Typechecking Java protocols with Mungo/StMungo
Abstract: 
This is a tutorial on using Mungo/StMungo, a toolchain based on multiparty session
types and their connection with typestates, for distributed programming in Java.
The first tool, Mungo, statically checks that methods are called in certain
permitted sequences, according to a typestate specification. An
application of this is to communication protocols, since send and
receive methods must be called in sequences that are allowed by the
protocol. Mungo extends Java with an optional typestate definition, which defines
an object protocol as a state machine, specifying the permitted sequences of method calls.
The second tool, StMungo(“Scribble-to-Mungo”) helps with instantiating the typestate
definition for communication protocols, by translating from Scribble and generating
Java skeleton code. The resulting prototype can be further implemented, typechecked
by Mungo to ensure that the implementation follows the protocol, and then compiled
and run as usual.

We give an overview of the key stages of the Mungo/StMungo toolchain, from translating
Scribble local protocol specifications to Java, to Java implementation, to Mungo
typechecking, with examples. We then demonstrate the Scribble, StMungo and Mungo
toolchain by specifying and implementing a domain name server(DNS), as a real-world use case.

Bio for the team:
Dr. Ornela Dardha: Is a Lecturer (Assistant Professor) at the School of Computing Science, University
of Glasgow. She is a Co-Investigator within the UK EPSRC programme grant From Data
Types to Session Types: A Basis for Concurrency and Distribution (ABCD), and a Site
Leader of the European RISE Action Behavioural Application Program Interfaces (BehAPI.

Previously, she was a Postdoctoral Researcher (Jan 2014 - Apr 2018) within the ABCD
project. She obtained my PhD in computing science from the University of Bologna, Italy.
She obtained my BSc (2008) and MSc (2010) in computing science both summa cum laude from
Sapienza University of Rome, Italy.
You can find more detailed information at: http://www.dcs.gla.ac.uk/~ornela/

Prof. Simon Gay: Is a Professor of Computing Science and has been at the University of Glasgow since 2000.
He is the Glasgow PI of the the UK EPSRC programme grant From Data
Types to Session Types: A Basis for Concurrency and Distribution (ABCD).
He has contributed to the study of session types in pi calculus, in functional
languages, and in object-oriented languages; the latter work provides the
foundation for Mungo.
You can find more detailed information at: http://www.dcs.gla.ac.uk/~simon/

Laura Voinea: Is a Research Associate at the School of Computing Science,
University of Glasgow, working on the ABCD project with Simon Gay and Ornela Dardha.
She is finishing up my PhD in Computer Science at the University of Glasgow, under
the supervision of Simon Gay an Ornela Dardha.
She has received my BSc and MSc in Computer Science at the University of Glasgow.
You can find more detailed information at: https://lauravoinea.github.io



--------------------Summary------------------------------------

CHOReVOLUTION IDR
Massimo Tivoli & Marco Autili, Universita Degli Studi Dell'Aquila
massimo.tivoli@univaq.it  and marco.autili@univaq.it
(Suggested by COORDINATION) - CONFIRMED

STORM 
Christian Hensel & Joost-Pieter Katoen
dehnert@cs.rwth-aachen.de katoen@cs.rwth-aachen.de
A new probabilistic model checker developed  at RWTH Achen.  It complements and outperforms the well-established model checker PRISM, and provides great engineering results both in allowing model checking of new types of models, and in performance optimisations based on sound theoretical results. Christian Hensel just received the prestigious EAPLS PhD Thesis Award for his work on Storm. 
(Suggested by FORTE) - CONFIRMED

ByMC - Byzantine Model Checker 
ta.etysrof@vonnok widder@ecs.tuwien.ac.at
Developed at TU Vienna (https://forsyte.at/software/bymc/). This is the first-of-its-kind tool that allows for sound verification of parameterised Byzantine fault-tolerant distributed protocols. It has been applied to a number of case studies, including recent blockchain consensus protocols. The lead developers are Igor Konnov and Josef Widder, who are now applying such formal verification techniques at Interchain, a blockchain company.
(Suggested by FORTE) - CONFIRMED

Angainor, the ThunderStorm tool
miguel.marques.matos@tecnico.ulisboa.pt
reproducible evaluation and fault injection of large-scale distributed systems.
(Suggested by DAIS) - CONFIRMED

Ornela Dardha and Adriana Laura voinea
a.voinea.1@research.gla.ac.uk
Mugno and MungoST tool for session type analysis of Java Programs


Emilio Tuosto
ChoGram


List of tutorial papers.

1. Choreographic Development of Message-Passing Applications
2. Parameterized Verification with Byzantine Model Checker
3. CHOReVOLUTION IDRE: An Integrated Development and Run-time Environment for Automatically Realizing and Executing Distributed Applications
4. Kollaps/Thunderstorm: Reproducible Evaluation of Distributed Systems
5. Typechecking Java protocols with Mungo/StMungo






Tuesday 16/6/2020

10.00 - 11.00   Peter Kriens: Formal Specifications to Increase Understanding
11.00 - 11.30   break
11.30 - 12.30   2 presentations
12.30 - 14.00   break
14.00 - 15.00   2 presentations
15.00 - 15.30   break
15.30 - 16.30   2 presentations (or three short presentations for the short papers)

Wednesday 17/6/2020

10.00 - 11.00   Nathalie Bertrand : TBA
11.00 - 11.30   break
11.30 - 13.00   Best Paper Presentations
13.00 - 14.00   break
14.00 - 15.00   2 presentations
15.00 - 15.30   break
15.30 - 16.30   2 presentations (or three short presentations for the short papers)

Thursday 18/6/2020

10.00 - 11.00   Holger Hermanns: Power-Optimal Scheduling of LEO Satellite Networks
11.00 - 11.30   break
11.30 - 12.30   2 presentations
12.30 - 14.00   break
14.00 - 15.00   2 presentations
15.00 - 15.30   break
15.30 - 16.30   2 presentations (or three short presentations for the short papers)


https://slack.com/apps/A5GE9BMQC-zoom 
https://applications.zoom.us/slack/api/slackIntegration

Upload video on youtube as private.
use Zoom webinars
Find hosts




14.00 - 15.00   Adam Shimi, Aurélie Hurault and Philippe Queinnec. Derivation of Heard-Of Predicates From Elementary Behavioral Patterns
                        Kiraku Minami. Trace Equivalence and Epistemic Logic to Express Security Properties
15.00 - 15.30   break
15.30 - 16.30   Shukun Tokas and Olaf Owe. A Formal Framework for Consent Management
                        Claudio Antares Mezzina and Marco Bernardo. Towards Bridging Time and Causal Reversibility

Thursday 18/6/2020

10.00 - 11.00   Holger Hermanns: Power-Optimal Scheduling of LEO Satellite Networks
11.00 - 11.30   break
11.30 - 12.30   Rayna Dimitrova, Maciej Gazda, Mohammadreza Mousavi, Sebastian Biewer and Holger Hermanns. Conformance-Based Doping Detection for Cyber-Physical Systems
                        Davide Basile, Maurice H. ter Beek and Axel Legay. Strategy Synthesis for Autonomous Driving in a Moving Block Railway System with Uppaal Stratego
12.30 - 14.00   break
14.00 - 15.00   Michaela Klauck, Timo P. Gros, Marcel Steinmetz, Jörg Hoffmann and Holger Hermanns. Towards Deep Statistical Model Checking
                        Christian Bartolo Burlo, Adrian Francalanza and Alceste Scalas. Towards a Hybrid Verification Methodology for Communication Protocols
15.00 - 15.30   break
15.30 - 16.30   Jeremy Sproston. Probabilistic Timed Automata with One Clock and Initialised Clock-Dependent Probabilities
                        Sergio Feo-Arenis, Milan Vujinovic and Bernd Westphal. On Implementable Timed Automata